---
layout: post
title: mobile CSS 
---
<p>I decided to revisit the mobile CSS situation today. It's actually pretty good. <a href="http://www.htmldog.com/ptg/archives/000056.php">HTML Dog </a>has a pretty good update as the to the situation but I'll summarize it for you. </p><p>Basically CSS comes with so-called <code>media </code>types which include <code>all, screen, print, handheld </code>and some others that presently aren't probably worth bothering about. I've already been using the <code>print </code>thing as you can tell if you have a recent browser and you do a print preview of this page. The styling is quite different from the screen version. It's pretty easy to do, just look at the source of this page, you just define a <code>print.css </code>and a <code>screen.css </code>and then, in each one, <code>@include common.css </code>which would contain basic character styling and colours that are used in all the medias. </p><p>So the point here is <code>handheld </code>media type, if supported correctly in the mobile browsers, can be used the same way. Is it supported correctly? Yet? Well, the test page <a href="http://htmldog.com/test/handheld.html">http://htmldog.com/test/handheld.html </a>will tell you - just point your phone browser at it. The CORRECT answer SHOULD be, "no" for the screen ones and "yes" for the handheld ones. </p><p>My Nokia 6630 incorrectly ignores all the styles. My Sony-Ericsson S710a correctly ignores the screen styles and uses the handheld styles. Yay SE. </p><p>Also notice that if you grab the Opera web browser, View menu, Small Screen, you can see the correct result as well. </p><p>So, using that I've set up a few things. </p><ul><li>Repeat the page title at the top of the page - useful because a lot of phone browsers don't show the full <code>title </code>on the screen </li><li>Hide a lot of the bling, like the banner, the footer - keep from spamming the small screens. I do this by defining <code>div#footer { display: none; } </code>and so on in the handheld.css file </li><li>Add a "Skip navigation" link at the top of the page - add an anchor <code>#contentbox </code>link at the top of the page that only shows up in the mobile version of the page - this is so that people don't always have to scroll down every new page </li></ul><p>That's about it for now. My pages are already really lightweight in terms of KBs and I assume the phone browsers don't bother loading images that are hidden by CSS. So the result is an HTML + CSS solution that doesn't require any browser detection, rewriting any of your pages, or server-side junk. </p>
