---
layout: post
title: sudo apachectl stop && sudo apt-get remove apache2 && sudo apt-get install nginx
image: nginx-logo.png
---
<p>I binned apache finally on semacode.com. It was easy. A little bit of "this is really the last straw" frustration with mod_rewrite and I ditched it.</p><p>I've been threatening to leave you, apache, for years. Ever since I first cursed your horrid rewriterules, I knew that it would never be the same between us. You were good, once. You weren't just "a patchy" web server, but a scrappy one... once. But 2.0 you just didn't live up. You didn't fix your big warts. You got flabby. Even the decision by your developer team to <a href="https://issues.apache.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=13986">finally remove the default MIME type</a> didn't redeem you in my eyes.</p><p>No, it was just one poke in my eye too many, when you insisted on unencoding my percent encoded URLs before passing them to the rails/mongrel proxy, and there was just no way to make you stop doing it, no matter how many googles I searched. And so I said: enough is enough. Everyone on Rails uses <a href="http://wiki.nginx.org/">nginx</a> now, and I will too. I'm tired of learning how to sacrifice chickens to the apache configuration gods. Bring me something new, clean, shiny, fast, and easy to configure!</p><p>Learning how to configure nginx took an hour on the outside -- it's very easy and keeps all the good parts of apache's syntax and throws away the complete crap. It even allows me to compress stupid blocks into one-liners! :</p><pre>  if (-f $document_root/system/maintenance.html) { rewrite  ^(.*)$  /system/maintenance.html last; break; }</pre><p>Isn't that gorgeous! I agree. And so the "engine x" russians get my love now. It's all over. Sayanora. End communication.</p>
